CHAPTER VI

CONCLUSION.


We have endeavored to show how the faculty of abstracting and of
generalising has been developed empirically, and to follow it in its
spontaneous and natural evolution as shown in history,—not in the
philosophical speculations which are only its efflorescence, and which,
for the most part, ignore or despise its origins. It remains to us,
in conclusion, to seek out how, and by what causes, this intellectual
process has constituted and developed itself: further—what are the
different directions it has followed in the course of its development.

I. To contemporary psychology, the mind is a sum of processes of
dissimilar nature, whose mode of appearance and of evolution depends
upon predetermined conditions. In the total of intellectual operations,
abstraction is a process of secondary formation: it does not belong
to the primary stratum of sensations and percepts, of appetites and
tendencies, of primitive emotions. We found however that it was there in
embryo. How then, instead of remaining in this rudimentary state, has it
been so differentiated as to become a function proper to the intellect,
and with a long development that is still in progress?

The primary condition is the existence of _attention_, which brings a few
points into relief, amid the general confusion. We have shown elsewhere
that attention itself depends originally upon the instinct of individual
preservation.[136] Attention, however, can only precede and prepare
for abstraction, because it is a momentary state of application to the
variable aspects of events, and does not isolate anything.

We know how the first labor of separation, of dissociation, takes effect
in the formation of generic images, and how the extracted quality
_fixed_ itself, for better or worse, by the aid of a visual, auditory,
tactile scheme, by a movement, a gesture, which confers on it a sort of
independence.

Finally, with the word—the substitute for the abstract intuition—the
mental dissociation approximates to a real dissociation: the abstract
character, incarnated in the word, seems, as happens only too often, to
exist by itself. The process of abstraction, with its fitting instrument,
is completely constituted.

During these successive phases, and afterwards, throughout the course
of the historical development of human intelligence, the progress of
abstraction and of generalisation, depends upon two principal causes: one
general, i. e., utility; the other accidental and sporadic, the advent of
inventors.

I. In his book on _Darwinism_ (Ch. XV.) Wallace, in contesting the
theory that applies the law of conservation of variations, useful in
the struggle for existence, to the mental faculties, insists at length
upon the mathematical faculty; he maintains that it is an inexplicable
exception, a case that cannot be reduced to law. The inaptitude of
inferior races for even the simplest calculations is well known;
how—from such a rudimentary origin—could it develop into the genius of
a Newton, a Laplace, or a Gauss? What motive power accounts for this
development? The author establishes by a host of sufficiently useless
historical details, that mathematical superiority played no part in the
struggle of tribe with tribe, and later on of people with people (Greeks
against Persians), and that the victory resulted from other causes, moral
and social. For this there is abundant evidence. But since mathematical
aptitude is only a particular instance of abstraction, albeit one of the
most perfect, the question ought to be proposed under a more general
form. Had the aptitude for abstraction, _ab initio_, any practical value?
Yes, “the motive power that caused its development, that Wallace claims
without specifying it, is utility.”

To avoid possibility of equivocation, let us remark that the development
of the attitude for abstracting and generalising may be explained in
a two-fold manner: by acknowledging the influence of heredity, and by
omitting it.

In the former case, it is supposed that this aptitude appears as a
“spontaneous variation” in the individual or race, that it fixes itself,
is reciprocal, grows by slow accumulation in the course of generations.
This theory postulates the heredity of acquired characters, which is
accepted by some, rejected by others, more especially since the advent of
Weismann. I refrain from invoking it, by reason of its hypothetical and
disputed nature. The probability of any transmission would moreover be
far harder to establish here than in other psychical directions, such as
imagination, or feeling.

In the second case, with elimination of the hereditary factor, progress
must be attributed to social causes, utility and imitation. From all time
there have been minds which when face to face with practical problems
knew better than others how to extract the essential, and neglect the
accessory, in the complex of facts. The utility of abstraction is
identical with that of attention, which does not require demonstration;
it may be summed up in a single word: to simplify. As the process
succeeds, it finds imitators. There is no need to admit at the outset
any reflected and fully conscious abstraction: a happy instinct, guided
by the needs of life, is sufficient at the commencement. Races that
are poorly gifted in this respect, or little apt at imitating their
betters, have never got beyond a low level. In effect, abstraction and
generalisation are the nerve of all knowledge that transcends sensation.
Is this mode of cognition useful? There can be no possible doubt as to
the answer.

2. The rôle of inventors corresponds to the fact which, in transformist
terminology, is known as spontaneous variation. By inventors, we mean
those who are born with the talent or the genius for abstraction. It
is superfluous to prove that such have been found, in considerable
numbers. They are abstract thinkers by instinct, as others are musicians,
mechanicians, designers. The biography of the great mathematicians
abounds in examples: Pascal inventing geometry out of a few vague
indications from his father; Newton divining Euclid’s demonstrations
from the simple enunciation of the theorems; Ampère, before he could
read or understand the use of figures, making long calculations by means
of a few pebbles; Gauss, at five years old, rectifying the arithmetic
of a workman, etc. If fewer analogous facts can be quoted from the
other sciences, it is because mathematical precocity is frequent, and
is more surprising. All that is the effect of innate disposition: this
word serving only to recapitulate our ignorance of the causes which
produce such minds. In the development of knowledge by abstraction and
generalisation, the first cause—utility—may be likened to the part played
by slow actions in geology; whether in the case of practical inventions,
or of the constitution of an idiom, it is continuous, collective, and
anonymous. The rôle of the great abstract thinkers, on the contrary,
resembles the rapid and epoch-making actions.

II. If we now consider the progress of abstraction from a more general
point of view (instead of following it step by step, from its lowest
to its highest degree, as in the preceding chapters), i. e., according
to its orientation towards a given end, we find that it has followed
three principal directions during its history: practical, speculative,
scientific. These are, indeed, inseparable, inasmuch as practical
abstraction leads to science, scientific abstraction is profitable to
practice, and speculation cannot entirely forego the other two.[137]

Abstraction and practical generalisation are necessarily the first in
order, as we found in studying their first appearance in the lower
animals, in children, and in savages. They serve to distinguish the
qualities of things by some word, or sign; they subserve the simple
adaptations of daily life. Later on, at a higher stage, they note the
appearance of mixed processes, which, while more especially directed to
utility, are already the prelude to scientific knowledge. Disinterested
curiosity has awakened, and timidly makes for daylight. A minimum
acquaintance with the history of the sciences teaches us that all were at
their origin processes of _applied_ research, and that often, in their
uncertain efforts, our forbears found what they were not looking for. The
numerative systems issued from the need of counting objects, and later
on, from rude commercial exchanges. Elementary geometry was required,
in order to measure the fields, to determine a right angle, to fix
relative positions, and to furnish the indispensable parts of primitive
architecture. The invention of the lever, of the balance, of rudimentary
engines for the lifting of heavy masses, gave the first foundations of
mechanics. Astronomy arose in the desire to regulate civil life and
the religious festivals, and the wish (e. g., among the Peruvians and
Mexicans) not to irritate the gods by delaying the sacrifices due to
them. Metallurgy, and later on the search for the philosopher’s stone,
and the elixir of life, were the prelude to scientific chemistry. The
historical outset of each science would furnish a profusion of similar
facts.

The two other operations issued by an internal division of labor from
this—at first the only—tendency of the mind.

First come purely speculative, i. e., philosophical or metaphysical
abstraction and generalisation. This new trend has clean and well defined
characteristics; and it was, in antiquity, the privilege of two peoples
alone, the Greeks and the Hindus. Abstraction leads immediately to the
highest generalisations; from the crude and direct simplification of a
few facts, the mind leaps at a bound to the final causes of things;
it skips the intermediate stages: it ignores the sequence of slow
and progressive evolution. This procedure where, in point of fact,
abstraction and generalisation are only the servants of a particular form
of imagination, found its first complete expression in Plato, and the
Theory of Ideas. With Plato, the human intellect tasted for the first
time the supreme pleasures of playing with the highest abstractions,
and believing firmly that the universe can be summed up, constructed
and explained by the help of some few entities. In this direction,
notwithstanding its manifold changes of aspect, the generalising process
has remained fundamentally the same, and has done no more than repeat
itself. We are here concerned with statement, not with criticism.
Psychologists must needs admit that this tendency to construct the world
(whether or no it be illusory) is a fact inherent in the nature of the
human intellect. Stallo, in the book already quoted,[138] gives an
incisive critique of the fundamental concepts of the physical sciences,
and their unconscious trend towards metaphysics. His appreciation of the
characteristics proper to the purely speculative process of abstraction
and generalisation is so apt, that we cannot do better than transcribe it:

    “Whatever diversity may exist between metaphysical systems,
    they are all founded upon the express or implied supposition
    that there is a fixed correspondence between concepts and
    their filiations on the one hand and things and their mode
    of interdependence on the other. This fundamental error is
    in great part due to a delusory view of the function of
    language as an aid to the formation and fixation of concepts.
    Roughly stated, concepts are the meanings of words; and the
    circumstances that words primarily designate things, or at
    least objects of sensation and their sensible interactions,
    has given rise to certain fallacious assumptions which, unlike
    the ordinary infractions of the laws of logic, are in a sense
    natural outgrowths of the evolution of thought (not without
    analogy to the organic diseases incident to bodily life) and
    may be termed structural fallacies of the intellect. These
    assumptions are:

    “1. That every concept is the counterpart of a distinct
    objective reality, and that hence there are as many things, or
    natural classes of things, as there are concepts or notions.

    “2. That the more general or extensive concepts and the
    realities corresponding to them pre-exist to the less general,
    more comprehensive, concepts and their corresponding realities;
    and that the latter concepts and realities are derived from
    the former, either by a successive addition of attributes or
    properties, or by a process of evolution, the attributes or
    properties of the former being taken as implications of those
    of the latter.

    “3. That the order of the genesis of concepts is identical with
    the order of the genesis of things.

    “4. That things exist independently of and antecedently to
    their relations; that all relations are between absolute terms;
    and that therefore whatever reality belongs to the properties
    of things is distinct from that of the things themselves.”

The differences between this procedure and that proper to the third (or
scientific) direction need hardly be enumerated.

Here the advance is step by step, without for an instant losing hold of
the thread that leads back to the starting-point of experience. Even
where the mind takes giant strides, or leaps across the intermediate
generalisations, it pauses to verify its results and to take up the
thread it had loosed for the moment. This is the typical process. Since
it formed the basis of our discussion of the intermediate and higher
forms of abstraction, we need not here return to it. Yet in conclusion,
it is well to recall once more what makes it of sterling value.

To reduce the essentials of abstraction and generalisation to the
exclusive use of the word (or sign) as is customary, is an error that
can only be explained by the time-honored neglect of the function of
the _unconscious_ in psychology. The sign is no more than an instrument
of simplification, an abbreviated formula. When the mind works with the
aid of concepts, the co-operation of two factors, the one conscious,
the other unconscious or subconscious, is required, in order that its
labor may be legitimate and fruitful: on the one hand, we have words or
signs, accompanied sometimes by a vague representation; on the other
hand, a latent, potential, organised knowledge. We endeavored above (Ch.
IV.) to show how this _couple_ forms and fixes itself. The mechanism is
invariably the same, without exception. Whether we keep up a trivial
conversation by means of the abstract terms which compose our languages,
or whether we ascend to the highest generalisations, there is in the
mental state no more than a difference in degree; there is no difference
in nature. Beneath the words that are the clear factors, exists the dumb
travail, the vague invocation, of the organised experience that gives
life to them. Without this unconscious factor which may, often does,
become conscious, there is nought but illusion. When we induct, deduct,
traverse a long series of abstractions to demonstrate or to discover, the
useful work consists in new relations which establish themselves in our
organised potential knowledge; words are no more than the instruments
that commence the task, facilitate and mark its phases. When the mind
is grappling with the highest abstractions, and climbs from height to
height, what preserves it from catastrophe, and guarantees against error,
is the quantity and quality of the unconscious material stored up
beneath the words. The entomologist who at first sight, and immediately,
classifies one insect among millions of species, acts in virtue of
his long experience, impressed firmly in his memory with salient
characteristics: he proceeds from the sensory data to the name. In the
inverse operation, when he merely enunciates the name, all this acquired
knowledge is the substrate. The existence of these conscious-unconscious
couples is, so to speak, a rule in psychology: general ideas are but
a particular case, perhaps the least well-known: hence we previously
likened them (Ch. IV.) to _mental habits_.

It follows that in proportion as we ascend in generalisation we rise,
not into vacuity, as has been said, but into the simple—as also, it
must be confessed, into the approximate. The relatively empty concepts
(there are none that are absolutely void of content) are the product
of a discontinuous generalisation which prevents descent without
interruption or omission into the concrete. Of course these are chiefly
encountered in the world of pure speculation. They are names representing
a knowledge that is incomplete, partial, inadequate, or ill-organised;
they correspond not to elimination of what is useless, but to deficit of
what is necessary. Having no possible contact with reality, they float
in an unreal atmosphere, and are material for a fragile and quickly
crumbling architecture. The aim of thinking by concepts is to substitute
for complex states, simpler conditions that may be turned and re-turned
in every possible sense, in order the better to discover their relations:
whereas here, by the nature of things, the unconscious activity, the
labor that operates silently in the lower strata, is applied to a soil
that is full of faults and fissures, and can but project a false light
into consciousness.

It has frequently been stated that symbolic thought is thinking by
substitution. This formula is admissible only when we recognise that
the substitute supposes, nay expects, the _actual_ existence of that
for which it is substituted. Substitution is valid in consciousness,
but not for the total operation. To sum up in a word: the psychology of
abstraction and generalisation, is in a great measure the _psychology of
the unconscious_.

We have merely studied general ideas in so far as they have an assignable
origin in experience, and do not transcend its limits. Are there, as some
maintain, notions anterior to any sensory intuition—that can by no means
nor effort be derived from empirical data? It is not our part to discuss
this question. The thesis—whether or no it be legitimate—is a contention
in favor of innate ideas, and in whatever fashion it is conceived (_à
priori_ forms, hereditary disposition, cerebral conformation), it is the
problem of the ultimate constitution of human intelligence, which we have
rigorously eliminated from our present subject.
